



Transport Layer Security                                         B. Beck
Internet-Draft                                                   OpenSSL
Intended status: Standards Track                             D. Benjamin
Expires: 9 March 2027                                         Google LLC
                                                              D. O'Brien
                                                                        
                                                              K. Nekritz
                                                                    Meta
                                                        5 September 2026


                      TLS Trust Anchor Identifiers
                 draft-ietf-tls-trust-anchor-ids-latest

Abstract

   This document defines the TLS Trust Anchors extension, a mechanism
   for a TLS client or server to select a certificate to present based
   on the peer's trusted certification authorities.  It describes
   certification authorities more succinctly than the TLS Certificate
   Authorities extension.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://tlswg.github.io/tls-trust-anchor-ids/draft-ietf-tls-trust-
   anchor-ids.html.  Status information for this document may be found
   at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-tls-trust-anchor-ids/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Transport Layer
   Security Working Group mailing list (mailto:tls@ietf.org), which is
   archived at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/tls/.  Subscribe
   at https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/tls/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/tlswg/tls-trust-anchor-ids.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 9 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
     2.1.  Terminology and Roles
   3.  Overview
   4.  Trust Anchor Identifiers
   5.  TLS Extension
     5.1.  Extension Syntax
     5.2.  Relying Party Configuration
     5.3.  Authenticating Party Configuration
       5.3.1.  Trust Anchor Ranges
     5.4.  Certificate Selection
     5.5.  Strict Certification Paths
     5.6.  Recovery
   6.  Trust Anchor Groups
     6.1.  Versioned Groups
   7.  Certificate Properties
     7.1.  Trust Anchor ID Property
     7.2.  Trust Anchor Group Inclusions Property
     7.3.  Trust Anchor Negotiation Property
     7.4.  Media Type
     7.5.  ACME Extension
       7.5.1.  Example
   8.  Use Cases
     8.1.  Making Use of Newly-Trusted CAs
     8.2.  Removing Untrustworthy CAs
     8.3.  Key Rotation
     8.4.  Other Root Transitions
     8.5.  Intermediate Elision
     8.6.  Conflicting Relying Party Requirements
     8.7.  Backup Certificates
     8.8.  Public Key Pinning
   9.  Privacy Considerations
     9.1.  Relying Parties
     9.2.  Authenticating Parties
   10. Security Considerations
     10.1.  Incorrect Selection Metadata
     10.2.  Trust Anchor Negotiation
       10.2.1.  Relying Party Policies
       10.2.2.  Agility
       10.2.3.  Serving Multiple Certificates
       10.2.4.  Targeting TLS Interception
   11. IANA Considerations
     11.1.  TLS ExtensionType Updates
     11.2.  Media Type Updates
     11.3.  CertificatePropertyType Registry
   12. References
     12.1.  Normative References
     12.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgements
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   TLS [RFC9846] authentication uses X.509 certificates [RFC5280] to
   associate the _authenticating party's_ TLS key with its application
   identifiers, such as DNS names.  These associations are signed by
   some certification authority (CA).  The peer, or _relying party_,
   curates a set of CAs that are trusted to only sign correct
   associations, which allows it to rely on the TLS to authenticate
   application identifiers.  For a TLS server certificate, the
   authenticating party is the server and the relying party is the
   client.  For a TLS client certificate, the roles are reversed.

   An authenticating party may need to interoperate with relying parties
   that trust different sets of CAs.  Section 4.3.4 of [RFC9846] defines
   the certificate_authorities extension to accommodate this.  It allows
   the authenticating party to provision multiple certificates and
   select the one that will allow the relying party to accept its TLS
   key.  This is analogous to parameter negotiation elsewhere in TLS.

   Without a negotiation mechanism, the authenticating party must obtain
   a single certificate that simultaneously satisfies all relying
   parties.  This is challenging when relying parties are diverse.  PKI
   transitions, including those necessary for user security, naturally
   lead to relying party diversity, so the result is that service
   availability conflicts with security and overall PKI evolution:

   *  For an authenticating party to use a CA in its single certificate,
      all supported relying parties must trust the CA.  PKI transitions
      then become difficult when authenticating parties support older,
      unupdated relying parties.  This impacts both new keys from
      existing CA operators and new CA operators.

   *  When a relying party must remove no longer trustworthy CAs, rotate
      CA keys, add new CAs, or otherwise update to meet new security
      requirements, it will differ from older versions and potentially
      other relying parties.  This adds to relying party diversity and
      the challenges that authenticating parties and CAs face.  The
      relying party must then choose between compromising on user
      security or burdening the rest of the ecosystem, potentially
      impacting availability in the process.

   However, certificate_authorities's size is impractical for some
   applications.  Existing PKIs may have many CAs, and existing CAs may
   have long X.509 names.  As of August 2023, the Mozilla CA Certificate
   Program [MOZILLA-ROOTS] contained 144 CAs, with an average name
   length of around 100 bytes.  Such TLS deployments often do not use
   trust anchor negotiation at all.

   To address this, this document introduces Trust Anchor Identifiers
   (Trust Anchor IDs).  There are several parts to this mechanism:

   1.  Section 4 defines _trust anchor IDs_, which are short, unique
       identifiers for X.509 trust anchors, or groups of trust anchors.

   2.  Section 5 defines a TLS extension that communicates the relying
       party's requested trust anchors using trust anchor IDs.  IDs that
       represent individual trust anchors can mitigate long X.509 names.
       IDs that represent groups of trust anchors can mitigate large
       trust anchor lists.

   3.  Section 5.6 defines a recovery mechanism that, when the relying
       party is a TLS client, can mitigate signaling failures.  The
       server provides its available trust anchors alongside its
       certificate, so that the client can retry on mismatch.  This can
       further mitigate large trust anchor lists by allowing the client
       to initially omit some trust anchors or use an otherwise too
       broad trust anchor group.  However, this mitigation can come at
       the cost of additional round trips in some cases.

   Together, they reduce the size costs of trust anchor negotiation,
   supporting flexible and robust PKIs for more applications.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP
   14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   This document additionally uses the TLS presentation language,
   defined in Section 3 of [RFC9846], and ASN.1, defined in [X680].

2.1.  Terminology and Roles

   This document discusses three roles:

   Authenticating party:  The party authenticating itself in the
      protocol.  In TLS, this is the side sending the Certificate and
      CertificateVerify message.

   Relying party:  The party whom the authenticating party presents its
      identity to.  In TLS, this is the side that validates a
      Certificate and CertificateVerify message.

   Certification authority (CA):  The service issuing certificates to
      the authenticating party.

   Additionally, there are several terms used throughout this document
   to describe this proposal:

   Trust anchor:  A pre-distributed X.509 name and public key that
      relying parties use to determine whether a certification path is
      trusted.  See Section 6.1.1 of [RFC5280].  Trust anchors are
      sometimes configured as self-signed certificates.

   Certification path:  An ordered list of X.509 certificates starting
      with the target certificate.  Each certificate is issued by the
      next certificate, except the last, which is issued by a trust
      anchor.

3.  Overview

   TLS certificate selection (see Section 4.5.1.2 of [RFC9846]) combines
   information from both the authenticating and relying party:

   1.  The authenticating party is configured with one or more candidate
       certification paths.

   2.  The relying party is configured with one or more supported trust
       anchors.

   3.  In the TLS handshake, the relying party sends a ClientHello or
       CertificateRequest message that describes its preferences.

   4.  Based on this information, the authenticating party selects the
       best candidate certification path to present.

   To successfully complete the handshake, the authenticating party must
   select some path that both:

   *  is issued by one of the relying party's trust anchors and

   *  satisfies any other constraints in the TLS protocol, such as
      whether there is a common signature algorithm

   This document defines a mechanism to evaluate the first condition.
   In particular, it defines:

   *  How the relying party describes its supported trust anchors
      (Section 5.2)

   *  How the authenticating party interprets this description to inform
      certificate selection (Section 5.3)

   *  For server certificates, a recovery mechanism for signaling
      failure (Section 5.6)

4.  Trust Anchor Identifiers

   A trust anchor ID is a short, unique identifier that represents a
   trust anchor or a group of trust anchors.  When a trust anchor ID
   represents a group of trust anchors, it is known as a _trust anchor
   group_.

   A trust anchor ID is an object identifier (OID) [X680] under the OID
   arc of some IANA-registered Private Enterprise Number (PEN)
   [RFC9371].  For compactness, they are represented as relative object
   identifiers (see Section 33 of [X680]), relative to the OID prefix
   1.3.6.1.4.1.  For example, an organization with PEN 32473 might
   define a trust anchor ID with the OID 1.3.6.1.4.1.32473.1.  As a
   relative object identifier, it would be the OID 32473.1.

   Depending on the protocol, trust anchor IDs may be represented in one
   of three ways:

   *  For use in ASN.1-based protocols, a trust anchor ID's ASN.1
      representation is the relative object identifier described above.
      This may be encoded in DER [X690], or some other ASN.1 encoding.
      The example ID's DER encoding is the six-octet sequence {0x0d,
      0x04, 0x81, 0xfd, 0x59, 0x01}.

   *  For use in binary protocols such as TLS, a trust anchor ID's
      binary representation consists of the contents octets of the
      relative object identifier's DER encoding, as described in
      Section 8.20 of [X690].  Note this omits the tag and length
      portion of the encoding.  The example ID's binary representation
      is the four-octet sequence {0x81, 0xfd, 0x59, 0x01}.

   *  For use in ASCII-compatible text protocols, a trust anchor ID's
      ASCII representation is the relative object identifier in dotted
      decimal notation.  The example ID's ASCII representation is
      32473.1.

   The length of a trust anchor ID's binary representation MUST NOT
   exceed 255 bytes.  It SHOULD be significantly shorter, for bandwidth
   efficiency.

   A trust anchor ID representing a single trust anchor SHOULD be
   allocated by the CA operator and be common among relying parties that
   trust the CA.  They MAY be allocated by another party, e.g. when
   bootstrapping an existing ecosystem, if all parties agree on the ID.
   In particular, the protocol requires authenticating and relying
   parties to agree, and the authenticating party's configuration
   typically comes from the CA.

   A trust anchor ID representing a trust anchor group MAY be allocated
   by any party.  However, to be useful, the group requires agreement
   between relying parties and authenticating parties.  Section 6
   discusses defining trust anchor groups in more detail.

   When embedded in a TLS structure, a trust anchor ID uses the
   TrustAnchorID structure defined below.  The contents of the
   TrustAnchorID, after the one-byte length prefix, are the binary
   representation of the trust anchor ID.

   opaque TrustAnchorID<1..2^8-1>;

5.  TLS Extension

5.1.  Extension Syntax

   The trust_anchors extension is defined using the structures below:

   enum { trust_anchors(TBD), (2^16-1) } ExtensionType;

   /* Syntax when sent in ClientHello or CertificateRequest: */
   TrustAnchorID RequestedTrustAnchorList<0..2^16-1>;

   /* Syntax when sent in Certificate: */
   struct {} Empty;

   /* Syntax when sent in EncryptedExtensions: */
   TrustAnchorID AvailableTrustAnchorList<1..2^16-1>;

   A TrustAnchorID structure contains the binary representation of some
   trust anchor ID, as described in Section 4.

   When the trust_anchors extension is sent in ClientHello or
   CertificateRequest, the extension_data is a RequestedTrustAnchorList.
   It indicates that the sender supports the specified trust anchors or
   trust anchor groups.  The list is unordered, and MAY be empty.
   Section 5.2 describes how the relying party determines this value.
   Section 5.3 describes how the authenticating party evaluates this
   value.

   When the trust_anchors extension is sent in Certificate, the
   extension_data MUST be empty.  The extension MUST only be sent in the
   first CertificateEntry.  It indicates that the sender sent the
   certificate because the certificate matched a trust anchor ID sent by
   the peer.  Section 5.5 describes this in detail.

   When the trust_anchors extension is sent in EncryptedExtensions, the
   extension_data is an AvailableTrustAnchorList.  It indicates
   individual trust anchors for which the server has a candidate path,
   in order of most to least preferred by the server.  This list MUST
   NOT be empty.  If the server has no available trust anchors to
   present, it MUST omit the extension.  Section 5.6 describes this in
   detail.

5.2.  Relying Party Configuration

   Relying parties are configured with:

   1.  An _associated trust anchor ID_ for each supported trust anchor
       that participates in this protocol

   2.  A list of _requested trust anchor IDs_ which, together, describe
       supported trust anchors

   A trust anchor's associated ID MUST be the trust anchor ID which
   represents it.  In this document, the ID is expected to be configured
   separately from the trust anchor for compatibility with existing
   PKIs.  Future certificate profiles MAY define representations where
   the trust anchor ID is encoded directly in the trust anchor.

   Relying parties MAY support trust anchors without associated trust
   anchor IDs, but such trust anchors will not participate in this
   protocol.  Those trust anchors MAY participate in other trust anchor
   negotiation protocols, such as the certificate_authorities extension.

   In a TLS connection, the relying party sends its requested trust
   anchor IDs in the ClientHello message (if a client) or
   CertificateRequest message (if a server).  This communicates a set of
   supported trust anchors to the authenticating party.

   The requested trust anchor IDs MAY be determined by collecting the
   associated IDs of each supported trust anchor.  Alternatively, a
   relying party MAY configure a requested list of IDs for individual
   trust anchors and IDs for trust anchor groups.  Using groups can
   further reduce the size of messages sent by the relying party, but
   requires that authenticating parties be configured to recognize them.
   See also Section 5.3.

   If the relying party is a client, it is not necessary for the
   requested trust anchor IDs to be fully accurate.  A client MAY omit
   trust anchors that it trusts or signal trust anchors which it does
   not trust.  This can be useful in several scenarios:

   *  The client MAY try to reduce size with a common trust anchor
      group, but the group contains some untrusted trust anchors.
      Sending the group would signal the full contents of the group.

   *  The client MAY send a (possibly empty) subset of its trust anchors
      due to fingerprinting risks (see Section 9) or size concerns.

   *  The client MAY send trust anchors it does not trust.  This can
      reduce fingerprinting if, e.g., default instances of the client
      send this value, but an individual user has configured their
      software to distrust the CA.

   If the client list is inaccurate, it is possible the server will
   select an untrusted certificate.  The connection will then fail.
   Clients that send potentially inaccurate lists SHOULD implement the
   recovery mechanism described in Section 5.6.  The associated IDs of
   individual trust anchors are used in recovery.  Recovery requires a
   round-trip, so clients SHOULD send as accurate a list as feasible.

5.3.  Authenticating Party Configuration

   The authenticating party compares the requested trust anchor IDs with
   its candidate certification paths.  To do this, each candidate
   certification path that participates in this protocol MUST be
   configured with:

   *  The trust anchor ID for the CA that issued this candidate path.

   *  A (possibly empty) list of _trust anchor group inclusions_, which
      describe trust anchor groups known to contain the issuing CA.

   Section 7 defines a format to represent these properties.
   Section 7.5 defines how to obtain them from ACME [RFC8555].

   A CA can be contained in a family of related trust anchor groups,
   e.g. in the versioning construction described in Section 6.1.  To
   accomodate this, each trust anchor group inclusion describes a
   pattern of containing groups using a trust anchor range, defined
   below in Section 5.3.1.

   The authenticating party intersects this information with the
   requested trust anchor IDs to determine if the relying party trusts
   the issuing CA.  A candidate path is said to _match_ the requested
   trust anchor IDs if either:

   *  One of the requested trust anchor IDs is equal to the path's trust
      anchor ID.

   *  One of the requested trust anchor IDs is contained in one of the
      path's trust anchor group inclusions.

   Authenticating parties MAY have candidate certification paths that do
   not participate in this protocol and lack these properties.  These
   paths MAY participate in other trust anchor negotiation protocols,
   such as the certificate_authorities extension, or they MAY be used as
   a fallback when no matching issuer is found.

5.3.1.  Trust Anchor Ranges

   A _trust anchor range_ is a structure that represents a particular
   pattern of related IDs.  It is defined by the following TLS
   structure:

   struct {
       TrustAnchorID base;
       uint64 min;
       uint64 max;
   } TrustAnchorRange;

   A trust anchor range is said to _contain_ some trust anchor ID, id,
   if the id, as a relative OID, is the concatenation of base and some
   integer component between min and max, inclusive. max can be set to
   2^64-1 if there is no upper bound. min and max can be set to the same
   value to describe a single ID.

   The following procedure can be used to perform this check.  It
   succeeds if the range contains id and fails otherwise:

   1.  Check that base does not end in the middle of an OID component.
       That is, check that the most-significant bit of the last byte of
       base is unset.  If it is set, fail the procedure.

   2.  Check that base is a prefix of id.  If not, fail the procedure.
       Let rest be id with the base prefix removed.

   3.  Decode rest as a minimally-encoded, big-endian, base-128 OID
       component as follows:

       1.  If rest is empty, fail the procedure.

       2.  If the most-significant bit of the last byte of rest is set,
           fail the procedure.

       3.  If the most-significant bit of any other byte of rest is
           unset, fail the procedure.

       4.  If the first byte of rest is 0x80, fail the procedure.

       5.  Set v to zero.  Throughout this procedure, v will be less
           than 2^64.

       6.  For each byte b of rest:

           1.  If v is greater than or equal to 2^57, fail the
               procedure.

           2.  Set v to (v << 7) + (b & 127).

   4.  Check if min <= v <= max.  If this is not true, fail the
       procedure.  Otherwise, the procedure succeeds.

   For example, the trust anchor range with a base of 32473.1, a min of
   10, and a max of 20 contains the following IDs:

   *  32473.1.10

   *  32473.1.15

   *  32473.1.20

   It does not contain any of the following IDs:

   *  32473.1 (no component after base)

   *  32473.1.10.0 (extra components)

   *  32473.1.9 (last component out of range)

   *  32473.1.21 (last component out of range)

   *  32473.2.10 (not a child of base)

5.4.  Certificate Selection

   This document extends TLS certificate selection (Section 4.5.1.2 of
   [RFC9846]) as follows:

   *  If the ClientHello or CertificateRequest contains a trust_anchors
      extension, the authenticating party SHOULD send a certification
      path that matches the requested trust anchor IDs, as described in
      Section 5.3.  See Section 5.5 for additional requirements in this
      case.

   *  If the ClientHello or CertificateRequest contains both
      trust_anchors and certificate_authorities, certification paths
      that satisfy either extension's criteria MAY be used.  This
      additionally applies to future extensions which play a similar
      role.

   *  If no certification paths satisfy either extension, the
      authenticating party MAY return a handshake_failure alert, or send
      some fallback certificate, without considering trust_anchors or
      certificate_authorities.

   Sending a fallback allows the authenticating party to retain support
   for relying parties that do not implement any form of trust anchor
   negotiation.  In this case, the authenticating party must find a
   sufficiently ubiquitous trust anchor, if one exists.  However, only
   those relying parties need to be considered in this ubiquity
   determination.  Updated relying parties may continue to evolve
   without restricting fallback certificate selection.  Section 7.3
   describes a RECOMMENDED mechanism for determining fallbacks.

   When the authenticating party is a server, Section 5.6 describes an
   additional requirement for servers that implement this protocol.

5.5.  Strict Certification Paths

   If, and only if, the authenticating party sends a certification path
   that matches the relying party's trust_anchors extension, the
   authenticating party MUST send an empty trust_anchors extension in
   the first CertificateEntry of the Certificate message.

   In this case, the certificate_list flexibility described in
   Section 4.5.1 of [RFC9846] no longer applies.  The certificate_list
   MUST contain a complete certification path, correctly ordered and
   with no extraneous certificates.  That is, each certificate MUST
   certify the one immediately preceding it, and the path's trust anchor
   MUST certify the final certificate.

   If a relying party receives this extension in the Certificate
   message, it MAY choose to disable path building [RFC4158] and
   validate the peer's certificate list as a pre-built certification
   path.  Doing so avoids the unpredictable behavior of path-building,
   and helps ensure CAs and authenticating parties do not inadvertently
   provision incorrect paths.

5.6.  Recovery

   If the relying party is a client, it MAY, as described in
   Section 5.2, request extra trust anchors or omit trusted ones.  To
   accommodate this, this section defines a protocol for recovering from
   signaling failure in server certificate selection.

   When receiving a ClientHello with trust_anchors, the server collects
   all candidate certification paths which:

   *  Have a trust anchor ID, and

   *  Satisfy the conditions in Section 4.5.1.2 of [RFC9846], with the
      exception of certificate_authorities, and any future extensions
      that play a similar role

   If this collection is non-empty, the server MUST send a trust_anchors
   extension in EncryptedExtensions, containing the corresponding trust
   anchor IDs in preference order.

   If a client requests extra trust anchors or omits trusted ones, it
   SHOULD implement the following recovery mechanism:

   If the client receives either a connection error or an untrusted
   certificate, the client looks in the server's EncryptedExtensions for
   a trust anchor ID that it trusts.  If there are multiple, it selects
   an option based on the server's preference order and its local
   preferences.  It then makes a new connection to the same endpoint,
   requesting only the selected trust anchor ID in the ClientHello
   trust_anchors extension.  If the EncryptedExtensions had no
   trust_anchors extension, or no match was found, the client returns
   the error to the application.

   Clients SHOULD retry at most once per connection attempt.

   This mechanism allows the connection to recover from a certificate
   selection failure, at additional latency cost.

   This mechanism also allows servers to safely send fallback
   certificates that may not be as ubiquitously acceptable.  Without
   some form of trust anchor negotiation, servers are limited to
   selecting certification paths that are ubiquitously trusted in all
   supported clients.  This often means sending extra cross-certificates
   to target the lowest common denominator at a bandwidth cost.  If the
   ClientHello contains trust_anchors, the server MAY opportunistically
   send a less ubiquitous, more bandwidth-efficient path based on local
   heuristics, with the expectation that the client will retry when the
   heuristics fail.

6.  Trust Anchor Groups

   A trust anchor ID is typically much smaller than the corresponding
   X.509 name.  Depending on the number of trust anchors, this can be
   sufficient to efficiently represent relying party state.

   PKIs where further size savings are needed can use trust anchor
   groups (Section 4).  Trust anchor groups require additional
   coordination within a PKI, but they can further reduce relying party
   message sizes by allowing one ID to signal multiple trust anchors.
   To be usable, a trust anchor group must:

   *  be known to and sent by relying parties (see Section 5.2); and

   *  configured with candidate paths in authenticating parties (see
      Section 5.3), ideally provided by the CA during issuance (see
      Section 7).

   This document does not prescribe how to define trust anchor groups,
   but gives some general guidance:

   A trust anchor group specifies a collection of trust anchors, which a
   relying party can send to represent the contents.  For example:

   *  A set of root CAs (or intermediate CAs, as in Section 8.5)
      operated by a CA operator.

   *  A set of trust anchors common to large set of relying parties.

   *  A set of related application-specific trust anchors, such as a
      range of Merkle Tree Certificate landmarks
      [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs].

   Different group definitions trade off size savings, applicability,
   and coordination overhead.  A group that reflects a single CA
   operator will cover fewer trust anchors, so a relying party might
   combine several operators' IDs to describe its trust anchors.
   However, it is generally usable by relying parties that trust this CA
   operator.  Such a group also requires minimal coordination for the CA
   operator to provide group inclusion information (Section 5.3) with
   the certificate.

   Conversely, a group that reflects a single relying party vendor can
   potentially be the only ID sent.  However, it may be less generally
   usable when relying parties differ.  Groups reflecting multiple
   relying party vendors are more broadly usable, but may need to be
   combined with other IDs in a given relying party.  For example, a
   relying party might send a group containing established CAs common to
   its ecosystem, and individual IDs for its remaining, not yet as
   common CAs.

   A client relying party MAY send a group containing CAs it does not
   trust, however it SHOULD then be prepared to recover (see
   Section 5.6) in case of signaling failure.

   The matching process described in Section 5.3 can be implemented
   generically for any trust anchor group.  This allows deployments to
   tailor their group allocation based on their needs, without requiring
   software updates in authenticating parties.  Where feasible,
   deployments SHOULD use groups that are more broadly applicable and
   require lower coordination overhead.

6.1.  Versioned Groups

   Over time, a group may become out-of-date, making it describe current
   relying parties less effectively.  For example, a CA operator may
   deploy or turn down a CA instance, or a relying party may trust a new
   CA or distrust an existing CA.  Existing trust anchor groups SHOULD
   NOT be redefined, but the following versioning scheme MAY be used to
   define updated groups:

   A versioned sequence of trust anchor groups is identified by a OID
   arc.  Each group has an ID of this OID arc, with a non-negative
   integer version number component appended.  For example, versioned
   groups using the OID arc 32473.2 would have IDs 32473.2.0, 32473.2.1,
   32473.2.2, and so on.  When defining a new group version, the version
   component is incremented.

   The trust anchor group inclusion for a candidate path is a trust
   anchor range (Section 5.3.1) determined as follows:

   *  At issuance, if the trust anchor is no longer in the latest group
      version, the range's min and max values are the first and last
      version that include the trust anchor, respectively.

   *  At issuance, if the trust anchor is in the latest group version,
      the range's min value is the first version that includes the trust
      anchor, and its max value is 2^64-1.

   In the second case, the range contains not-yet-defined group
   versions, so there is a potential signaling error.  Suppose, after
   issuance, a new group version is defined without the trust anchor.
   The unlimited upper bound is now incorrect.  A relying party might
   not trust this trust anchor, while sending this new group version.
   However, the authenticating party will misinterpret the certificate
   as compatible based on its stale information.  Such signaling errors
   may result in the wrong certificate being selected.

   This can be mitigated in one several ways:

   *  Only pre-existing certificates are impacted.  Newly-issued
      certificates postdate this version and will have the correct upper
      bound.  When the certificate is renewed, group inclusions will be
      corrected.

   *  [SCTNotAfter] describes a trust anchor removal strategy that only
      impacts newly-issued certificates.  In this case, no renewal is
      needed.  Pre-existing group inclusions remain accurate under this
      strategy.

   *  If the authenticating party's preferences place the correct
      candidate path (issued by a newer trust anchor) ahead of
      misinterpreted one (issued by the removed trust anchor), the
      correct candidate will still be chosen.

   *  When the relying party is a client, any remaining signaling errors
      can be corrected with the recovery mechanism described in
      Section 5.6.

7.  Certificate Properties

   As described in Section 5.3, certification paths participating in
   this mechanism must be configured with a trust anchor ID.  This
   section introduces a RECOMMENDED extensible CertificatePropertyList
   structure for representing this and other additional properties of a
   certification path.  CertificatePropertyLists may be used as part of
   authenticating party configuration, and for CAs to communicate
   additional properties during certificate issuance.

   The extensibility aims to simplify application deployment as PKI
   mechanisms evolve.  When certificate issuance and application
   software is updated to pass this structure to the underlying TLS
   implementation, new properties may be transparently defined without
   changes to certificate and configuration management.

   A CertificatePropertyList is defined using the TLS presentation
   language (Section 3 of [RFC9846]) below:

   enum {
       trust_anchor_id(0),
       trust_anchor_group_inclusions(1),
       trust_anchor_negotiation(2),
       (2^16-1)
   } CertificatePropertyType;

   struct {
       CertificatePropertyType type;
       opaque data<0..2^16-1>;
   } CertificateProperty;

   CertificateProperty CertificatePropertyList<0..2^16-1>;

   The entries in a CertificatePropertyList MUST be sorted numerically
   by type and MUST NOT contain values with a duplicate type.  Inputs
   that do not satisfy these invariants are syntax errors and MUST be
   rejected by parsers.

   This document defines three properties:

   *  trust_anchor_id, defined in Section 7.1

   *  trust_anchor_group_inclusions, defined in Section 7.2

   *  trust_anchor_negotiation, defined in Section 7.3

   Future documents MAY define other properties for use with other
   mechanisms.  Such a document MUST define the format of the data field
   and how authenticating parties interpret the property.
   Authenticating parties MUST ignore properties with unrecognized
   CertificatePropertyType values.

7.1.  Trust Anchor ID Property

   The trust_anchor_id property's data field contains the binary
   representation of the trust anchor ID of the certification path's
   trust anchor, as described in Section 5.3.

7.2.  Trust Anchor Group Inclusions Property

   The trust_anchor_group_inclusions property's data field contains a
   TrustAnchorRangeList structure, defined below.  The
   TrustAnchorRangeList structure describes the certification path's
   trust anchor group inclusions, as described in Section 5.3.  Each
   TrustAnchorRange structure describes a trust anchor range, as defined
   in Section 5.3.1.

   TrustAnchorRange TrustAnchorRangeList<1..2^16-1>;

7.3.  Trust Anchor Negotiation Property

   The trust_anchor_negotiation property's data field MUST be empty.

   When a candidate certification path has this property, the
   authenticating party SHOULD NOT select it as a fallback when the
   path's issuer cannot be matched against the relying party.  When a
   candidate path lacks this property, the authenticating party MAY use
   it as a fallback.  See also Section 5.4.

   A path without the trust_anchor_negotiation property MAY still
   participate in this protocol and include the trust_anchor_id and
   trust_anchor_group_inclusions properties.  In particular, the
   authenticating party MAY still choose to condition the path on trust
   anchor negotiation.

   Section 7.5 discusses how an ACME server might set this property, as
   well as examples where the authenticating party might override this
   recommendation.

7.4.  Media Type

   A certification path with its associated CertificatePropertyList may
   be represented in a PEM [RFC7468] structure in a file of type
   "application/pem-certificate-chain-with-properties".  Files of this
   type MUST use the strict encoding and MUST NOT include explanatory
   text.  The ABNF [RFC5234] for this format is as follows, where
   "stricttextualmsg" and "eol" are as defined in Section 3 of
   [RFC7468]:

   certchainwithproperties = stricttextualmsg eol stricttextualmsg
                             *(eol stricttextualmsg)

   The first element MUST be the encoded CertificatePropertyList.  The
   second element MUST be an end-entity certificate.  Each following
   certificate MUST directly certify the one preceding it.  The
   certificate representing the trust anchor MUST be omitted from the
   path.

   CertificatePropertyLists are encoded using the "CERTIFICATE
   PROPERTIES" label.  The encoded data is a serialized
   CertificatePropertyList, defined in Section 7.

   Certificates are encoded as in Section 5.1 of [RFC7468], except DER
   [X690] MUST be used.

   The following is an example file with a certification path containing
   an end-entity certificate and an intermediate certificate.  The
   example CertificatePropertyList encodes:

   *  A trust_anchor_id property of 32473.1

   *  A trust_anchor_group_inclusions property with two group
      inclusions:

      -  2187.2.100 to 2187.2.200

      -  32473.3.42 to 32473.3.MAX

   *  A trust_anchor_negotiation property

   -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE PROPERTIES-----
   ADsAAAAEgf1ZAQABACsAKQORCwIAAAAAAAAAZAAAAAAAAADIBIH9WQMAAAAAAAAA
   Kv//////////AAIAAA==
   -----END CERTIFICATE PROPERTIES-----
   -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
   MIIBVzCB/6ADAgECAgkAh7Uv5X8pplkwCgYIKoZIzj0EAwIwGjEYMBYGA1UEAwwP
   SW50ZXJtZWRpYXRlIENBMB4XDTI2MDUwNTIxMzg1NVoXDTI3MDUwNTIxMzg1NVow
   FjEUMBIGA1UEAwwLZXhhbXBsZS5jb20wWTATBgcqhkjOPQIBBggqhkjOPQMBBwNC
   AAT5mg5z0464cE7rtEpTeSPFNlRUBjxqycdb4rvNkG3Fbd1R2IRo7zYOi5SP3S7L
   C4r5Hw+IiDq5X2nQT1w5ympeozIwMDAJBgNVHRMEAjAAMAsGA1UdDwQEAwIHgDAW
   BgNVHREEDzANggtleGFtcGxlLmNvbTAKBggqhkjOPQQDAgNHADBEAiBRdPrVpQtJ
   s+J9DFhT1Db6QmIZFfjFFKQ88B0gFezyfAIgSwIxntwrPFYagfK6vPcRpDxG2oLV
   LkfnP5v1SPjOsMY=
   -----END CERTIFICATE-----
   -----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
   MIIBRTCB7KADAgECAgkAkaBeQj6ZErAwCgYIKoZIzj0EAwIwEjEQMA4GA1UEAwwH
   Um9vdCBDQTAeFw0yNjA1MDUyMTM4MzJaFw0zMTA1MDQyMTM4MzJaMBoxGDAWBgNV
   BAMMD0ludGVybWVkaWF0ZSBDQTBZMBMGByqGSM49AgEGCCqGSM49AwEHA0IABJEH
   0D77iyFv01I/4sEqUaoUel50BBwsWSYrH/LtO6cdGI28NyzMyFuYrE6UCRusgAKo
   XBmWjHEGJmoDPoAy2t+jIzAhMA8GA1UdEwEB/wQFMAMBAf8wDgYDVR0PAQH/BAQD
   AgEGMAoGCCqGSM49BAMCA0gAMEUCIBWtPiDwXXEvbgy2+nu/w4MRBNsQ3hbVWyJT
   ITN+1R6WAiEA2AfGBy3Hz8oYY5wPldIndrXjntCzzSEduB6pEvYQZWo=
   -----END CERTIFICATE-----

   The IANA registration for this media type is described in
   Section 11.2.

7.5.  ACME Extension

   The format defined in Section 7.4 can be used with ACME's alternate
   format mechanism (see Section 7.4.2 of [RFC8555]) as follows.  When
   downloading certificates, a supporting client SHOULD include
   "application/pem-certificate-chain-with-properties" in its HTTP
   Accept header (Section 12.5.1 of [RFC9110]).  When a supporting
   server sees such a header, it MAY then respond with that format to
   include a CertificatePropertyList with the certification path.  This
   CertificatePropertyList MAY include trust_anchor_id and
   trust_anchor_group_inclusions properties for use with this protocol,
   or other properties defined in another document.

   When the ACME server provides multiple paths, e.g. with ACME's
   alternate certificate chain mechanism (see Section 7.4.2 of
   [RFC8555]), the ACME server SHOULD include the
   trust_anchor_negotiation property on any paths it expects to gate on
   trust anchor negotiation.  It SHOULD omit the property on any paths
   which are possible fallbacks when no trust anchors match.

   The authenticating party MAY override this recommendation.  In
   particular, if the authenticating party combines certification paths
   from two ACME orders, it might only consider some orders as a source
   for fallback paths.

   When a path is gated on trust anchor negotiation, this protocol
   removes the need for heuristics in determining which path to serve to
   which relying party.

7.5.1.  Example

   There are two CA operators, CA1 and CA2.  The authenticating party is
   configured to request certificates from ACME servers operated by each
   of CA1 and CA2.

   When the authenticating party requests certificates from CA1, it
   receives:

   *  Path 1A chains to an older root CA operated by CA1.  It does not
      set trust_anchor_negotiation because CA1 considers this to be a
      reasonable fallback for legacy relying parties.

   *  Path 1B chains to a newer root CA operated by CA1.  It sets
      trust_anchor_negotiation because not all relying parties support
      it yet.

   When the authenticating party requests certificates from CA2, it
   receives:

   *  Path 2A chains to a root CA operated by CA2.  It does not set
      trust_anchor_negotiation because CA2 considers this to be a
      reasonable fallback for legacy relying parties.

   *  Path 2B chains to a more specific intermediate CA.  It sets
      trust_anchor_negotiation because not all relying parties preload
      the intermediate.

   All paths include trust_anchor_id properties describing their
   corresponding issuer.  The authenticating party's TLS software will
   consider all four in connections that use the trust_anchors
   extension.

   For other connections, the TLS software needs to determine fallback
   paths.  Although both 1B and 2B lack the trust_anchor_negotiation
   property, the authenticating party knows that CA2 is more
   ubiquitously trusted among its supported relying parties than CA1.
   It configures its TLS software to use CA2 as the source of the
   fallback path, and so only path 2B will be used as fallback.

8.  Use Cases

   trust_anchors, like certificate_authorities, implements trust anchor
   negotiation.  That is, it allows an authenticating party to
   incorporate relying party trust anchors into certificate selection.
   trust_anchors allows a wider range of TLS applications to use trust
   anchor negotiation, notably those that would be unable to use
   certificate_authorities due to size or privacy limitations.

   Without trust anchor negotiation, authenticating parties are limited
   to CAs in the intersection of all supported relying parties.
   However, trust anchors can vary significantly between different
   relying party implementations and different versions of a single
   relying party implementation, particularly as PKIs evolve to meet
   user security needs.

   As security-positive PKI changes increase variance, this intersection
   shrinks.  This leads to a conflict between user security and service
   availability.  When the authenticating party cannot serve a
   certificate in the intersection, either the relying party must risk
   user security by not changing the PKI, or the authenticating party
   must degrade service availability by dropping support for some
   relying parties.

   The rest of this section discusses uses cases for trust anchor
   negotiation.

8.1.  Making Use of Newly-Trusted CAs

   When one relying party trusts a new CA, other relying parties, such
   as older ones, may not yet trust it.  Trust anchor negotiation allows
   an authenticating party to negotiate a certificate from the newer CA
   with relying parties that do trust it, while continuing to negotiate
   another certificate with relying parties that do not.  This allows
   PKI transitions to progress smoothly.  Connections can make use of,
   for example, a new CA's stronger signature algorithms, stronger
   validation practices, better automation, or more efficient
   certificate sizes, without interruptions to other connections.

   Without negotiation, the authenticating party is limited to its
   relying parties' intersection and must wait for every supported
   relying party to be updated before the transition even begins.  This
   wait could often take many years.  In some cases, such as with IoT
   devices, relying parties may never receive updates.

   In some contexts, other fields can provide a partial signal.  For
   example, post-quantum-capable relying parties may be detected with
   the signature_algorithms and signature_algorithms_cert extensions.
   However, this relies on all post-quantum CAs being added at roughly
   the same time and that they are sufficiently interchangeable to be
   negotiated with these extensions.  Trust anchor negotiation directly
   addresses this problem and allows for both gradual and possibly
   heterogeneous deployment of post-quantum CAs across relying parties.

8.2.  Removing Untrustworthy CAs

   When CAs are determined to be untrustworthy, relying parties must
   remove them to mitigate the risk to user security.  Over time, this
   shrinks their intersection with older relying parties.  Without
   negotiation, the result is authenticating parties have fewer and
   fewer CA choices available.  Even determining the intersecting CAs
   can be difficult.  Often, the only option is to try the new
   certificate and monitor errors.  For authenticating parties that
   serve many diverse relying parties, this is a disruptive and risky
   process.

   Trust anchor negotiation removes this constraint.  If an
   authenticating party's CA is distrusted, it can use a new CA in
   addition to the existing one.  The addition does not risk outages for
   older relying parties and may be chosen from a wider set of CAs, as
   it only needs to be compatible with the relying parties that
   distrusted the other CA.

   Over time, the authenticating party can monitor which certificates it
   serves, and re-evaluate which CA or CAs to use.  For example, it may
   find the new CA was sufficient, or that older relying parties have
   since all been updated.  However, user security depends on the
   relying party's trust anchors, not the authenticating party's choice
   of CA, so this can occur asynchronously, based on serving needs and
   costs, rather than delay the response to a security incident.

8.3.  Key Rotation

   Despite the severity of root CA private key compromise and the
   benefits of routinely rotating cryptographic key material, such
   rotation in PKIs is often very rare.  In 2023, the oldest root in
   [CHROME-ROOTS] and [MOZILLA-ROOTS] was 25 years old, dating to 1998.

   Key rotation in PKIs used in TLS is challenging, as it combines the
   challenges described in both Section 8.1 and Section 8.2.  Without
   trust anchor negotiation, authenticating parties cannot switch to the
   new root as long as any supported older relying party requires the
   old root.  That, in turn, means relying parties cannot distrust the
   old root, leaving them vulnerable.

   Trust anchor negotiation offers a smooth transition for CA key
   rotation.  The CA can provide certification paths for the old and new
   roots.  The authenticating party can then serve both paths without
   impacting older relying parties.  New relying parties can then
   distrust the old root.

8.4.  Other Root Transitions

   The mechanisms in this document can aid PKI transitions beyond key
   rotation.  For example, a CA operator may generate a postquantum root
   CA and issue from the classical and postquantum roots concurrently.
   The authenticating party will then, transparently and with no
   configuration change, serve both.  As in Section 8.3, newer relying
   parties can then remove the classical roots, while older relying
   parties continue to function.

   This same procedure may also be used to transition between newer,
   more size-efficient signature algorithms, as they are developed.

8.5.  Intermediate Elision

   In many PKIs, root CAs issue shorter-lived intermediate certificates
   which, in turn, issue end-entity certificates.  This comes at a
   bandwidth cost: the TLS handshake includes an extra certificate,
   which includes a public key, signature, and X.509 metadata.  Post-
   quantum signature algorithms will dramatically increase this cost.
   ML-DSA-65 [FIPS204], for example, has a total public key and
   signature size of 5,261 bytes.

   Trust anchor negotiation can avoid this size cost.  Relying parties
   predistribute intermediate CAs and configure them as short-lived
   trust anchors.  Authenticating parties can then send shorter paths to
   those relying parties.

   More generally, a CA operator provides authenticating parties with
   two certification paths: a longer path ending at a long-lived root
   and shorter path the other ending at a short-lived root.  Relying
   parties trust both the long-lived root and the most recent short-
   lived root.  The authenticating party sends the shorter path when
   possible, falling back to the longer path when the relying party’s
   short-lived root is stale.

8.6.  Conflicting Relying Party Requirements

   An authenticating party may need to support relying parties with
   different, potentially conflicting requirements.  For example, in
   contexts where online revocation checks are expensive, unreliable, or
   privacy-sensitive, user security is best served by short-lived
   certificates.  In other contexts, long-lived certificates may be more
   appropriate for, e.g., systems that are offline for long periods of
   time or have unreliable clocks.

   Trust anchor negotiation allows these conflicts to be resolved by
   different trust anchors where necessary.  This avoids the need to
   compromise on user security or service availability.

8.7.  Backup Certificates

   An authenticating party may obtain certification paths from multiple
   CAs for redundancy.  If one CA is compromised and removed from newer
   relying parties, the TLS server software will be able to gracefully
   serve a backup certification path, avoiding the immediate breakage
   that would otherwise be caused by this removal.

8.8.  Public Key Pinning

   To reduce security risk from misissued certificates, relying parties
   sometimes employ public key pinning [RFC7469].  Pinning effectively
   reduces a relying party's trust anchor list to a subset of the
   original set.

   As other relying parties in the PKI evolve, the pinning relying party
   limits the authenticating party to satisfy both the pinning
   constraint and newer constraints in the PKI.  This can lead to
   conflicts if, for example, the pinned CA is distrusted by a newer
   relying party.  The authenticating party is then forced to either
   break the pinning relying party, or break the newer ones.

   Trust anchor negotiation reduces this conflict, provided the pinning
   relying party negotiates with its reduced trust anchor list.  The
   authenticating party can then use a certificate from the pinned CA
   with the pinning relying party, and another CA with other relying
   parties.

9.  Privacy Considerations

9.1.  Relying Parties

   The trust_anchors extension is analogous to the
   certificate_authorities extension (Section 4.3.4 of [RFC9846]), but
   more size-efficient.  Like certificate_authorities, trust_anchors
   reveals some information about the relying party's trust anchors.
   However, unlike certificate_authorities, trust_anchors allows a
   relying party to only reveal a trust anchor in response to the
   authenticating party's list, which reduces the fingerprinting
   exposure.  This section provides guidance for a relying party to
   configure this mechanism, based on its privacy goals.

   When using this extension, a relying party's trust anchors may be
   divided into three categories:

   1.  Trust anchors whose IDs the relying party never sends, but still
       trusts.  These are trust anchors that do not participate in this
       mechanism.

   2.  Trust anchors whose IDs the relying party sends _conditionally_,
       i.e. only if the server offers them.  For example, the relying
       party may indicate support for a trust anchor if its ID is listed
       in the server's HTTPS/SVCB record or trust anchor list in
       EncryptedExtensions.

   3.  Trust anchors whose IDs the relying party sends
       _unconditionally_, i.e. independently of the authenticating
       party's behavior.

   Each of these categories carries a different fingerprinting exposure:

   Trust anchors that do not participate are not revealed by this
   extension.  However, they have some fingerprinting exposure due to
   being trusted.  Given a certification path, an authenticating party
   can probe whether the relying party trusts the trust anchor by seeing
   if the relying party accepts it.

   Trust anchor IDs sent in response to the authenticating party can
   only be observed actively.  That is, the authenticating party could
   vary its list and observe how the client responds, in order to probe
   for the client's trust anchor list.  This is similar to the exposure
   of trust anchors not participating in this extension, except that the
   trust anchor can be probed by only knowing the trust anchor ID.

   Trust anchor IDs sent unconditionally can be observed passively.
   This mode is analogous to the certificate_authorities extension.
   Relying parties SHOULD NOT unconditionally advertise trust anchor
   lists that are unique to an individual user.  Rather,
   unconditionally-advertised lists SHOULD be empty or computed only
   from the trust anchors common to the relying party's anonymity set
   (Section 3.3 of [RFC6973]).

   Relying parties SHOULD determine which trust anchors participate in
   this mechanism, and whether to advertise them unconditionally or
   conditionally, based on their privacy goals.

   Additionally, a relying party that computes the trust_anchors
   extension based on prior state may allow observers to correlate
   across connections.  Relying parties SHOULD NOT maintain such state
   across connections that are intended to be uncorrelated.

9.2.  Authenticating Parties

   If the authenticating party is a server, the trust_anchors extension
   in EncryptedExtensions enumerates the trust anchors for the server's
   available certification paths.  (See Section 5.6.)  This assumes
   these trust anchors are not sensitive.  Servers SHOULD NOT use this
   mechanism to negotiate certification paths with sensitive trust
   anchors.

   In servers that host multiple services, this protocol only enumerates
   certification paths for the requested service.  If, for example, a
   server uses the server_name extension to select services, this list
   is expected to be filtered by server_name.  This ensures that co-
   located services are not revealed.

   The above does not apply if the authenticating party is a client.
   This protocol does not enumerate the available certification paths
   for a client.

10.  Security Considerations

10.1.  Incorrect Selection Metadata

   If the authenticating party has provisioned certification paths with
   incorrect trust anchor IDs, it may negotiate inaccurately and send an
   untrusted path to the relying party when another candidate would have
   been trusted.  This will not result in the untrusted path becoming
   trusted, but the connection will fail.

10.2.  Trust Anchor Negotiation

   Both the trust_anchors and certificate_authorities (Section 4.3.4 of
   [RFC9846]) extensions implement trust anchor negotiation, so security
   considerations are largely unchanged from certificate_authorities.
   This section discusses security considerations for trust anchor
   negotiation in general.

10.2.1.  Relying Party Policies

   PKI-based TLS authentication depends on the relying party's
   certificate policies.  If the relying party trusts an untrustworthy
   CA, that CA can intercept TLS connections made by that relying party
   by issuing certificates associating the target name with the wrong
   TLS key.

   This attack vector is available with or without trust anchor
   negotiation.  The negotiation mechanism described in this document
   allows certificate selection to reflect a relying party's certificate
   policies.  It does not determine the certificate policies themselves.
   Relying parties remain responsible for trusting only trustworthy CAs,
   and untrustworthy CAs remain a security risk when trusted.

10.2.2.  Agility

   As with other TLS parameters, negotiation reduces a conflict between
   availability and security, which allows PKIs to better mitigate
   security risks to users.  When relying parties in an existing TLS
   ecosystem improve their certificate policies, trust anchor
   negotiation helps authenticating parties navigate differences between
   those relying parties and existing relying parties.  Each set of
   requirements may be satisfied without compatibility risk to the
   other.  Section 8 discusses such scenarios in more detail.

   Negotiation also reduces pressures on relying parties to sacrifice
   user security for compatibility.  If a relying party does not trust
   an authenticating party's current CA, connections between the two
   will fail until either the relying party trusts the CA or the
   authenticating party uses an already trusted CA.  Without trust
   anchor negotiation, the authenticating party is limited to one
   certificate, and therefore switching CAs risks compatibility problems
   with other relying parties.  The relying party then faces
   compatibility pressure to add this CA, even if it deems the CA a
   security risk.  With trust anchor negotiation, the authenticating
   party can use its existing CA _in addition to_ another CA trusted by
   the relying party.  This allows the ecosystem to improve
   interoperability without sacrificing user security.

10.2.3.  Serving Multiple Certificates

   Trust anchor negotiation reduces compatibility pressures against
   authenticating parties serving certificates from a less common CA, as
   they can be served with other certificates.  In some cases, the CA
   may have been distrusted, but still used to support older relying
   parties.  As discussed in Section 8 and Section 10.2.2, this
   capability aids PKI transitions that mitigate security risks to
   users.

   Even if the CA is untrustworthy, these certificates do not enable the
   CA to decrypt or intercept the connection.  If a certificate asserts
   the correct information about the authenticating party, notably the
   correct public key, the authenticating party can safely present it.
   Issuing a certificate for the authenticating party's public key does
   not grant the CA access to the corresponding private key.
   Conversely, if the attacker already has access to the authenticating
   party's private key, they do not need to be in control of a CA to
   intercept a connection.

   Rather, it is the relying party's choice of trusted CAs that
   determines susceptibility to interception.  If the relying party
   trusts a misbehaving or attacker-controlled CA, the attacker can
   intercept the connection with a public key certified by that CA,
   regardless of which CA is used by the intended authenticating party.
   Conversely, if the relying party does not trust the attacker's CA,
   the attacker cannot successfully intercept the connection using a
   public key certified by this CA.

   Choosing trusted CAs is a complex, security-critical process, the
   full considerations of which are outside the scope of this document.
   Relying parties thus SHOULD NOT interpret the authenticating party's
   choice of CA as an endorsement of the CA.  Trusting a CA means
   trusting _all_ certificates issued by that CA, so it is not enough to
   observe correct certificates from an authenticating party.  An
   untrustworthy CA may sign one correct certificate, but also sign
   incorrect certificates, possibly in the future, that can attack the
   relying party.

10.2.4.  Targeting TLS Interception

   A network attacker in possession of a misissued certificate could use
   trust anchor negotiation to differentiate clients and only enable TLS
   interception with clients that accept the certificate.  The network
   attacker may wish to do this to reduce the odds of detection.

   However, trust anchor negotiation only impacts detection where this
   differentiation was not already possible.  In TLS, the client offers
   all its available TLS features, including cipher suites and other
   extensions, in the TLS ClientHello.  Any variation in client TLS
   policies, related or unrelated to trust anchors, may be used as a
   fingerprint.  Transport properties, such as IP geolocation, may also
   be used.  While fingerprinting's heuristic nature makes broad,
   legitimate use difficult, a network attacker's single interception
   service can easily use it for targeted attacks.

   If the attacker targets any clients that enforce Certificate
   Transparency [RFC6962], the misissued certificates will need to be
   publicly logged.  In this case, detection is more robust, and client
   differentiation, with or without trust anchor negotiation, has no
   significant impact.

11.  IANA Considerations

11.1.  TLS ExtensionType Updates

   IANA is requested to create the following entry in the TLS
   ExtensionType Values registry, originally created in [RFC4366]:

   +=======+===============+===+===========+=============+============+
   | Value | Extension     |TLS| DTLS-Only | Recommended | Reference  |
   |       | Name          |1.3|           |             |            |
   +=======+===============+===+===========+=============+============+
   | TBD   | trust_anchors |CH,| N         | Y           | [this-RFC] |
   |       |               |EE,|           |             |            |
   |       |               |CR,|           |             |            |
   |       |               |CT |           |             |            |
   +-------+---------------+---+-----------+-------------+------------+

                                 Table 1

11.2.  Media Type Updates

   IANA is requested to create the following entry in the "Media Types"
   registry, defined in [RFC6838]:

   Type name:  application

   Subtype name:  pem-certificate-chain-with-properties

   Required parameters:  None

   Optional parameters:  None

   Encoding considerations:  7bit

   Security considerations:  Carries a cryptographic certificate and its
      associated certificate chain and additional properties.  This
      media type carries no active content.

   Interoperability considerations:  None

   Published specification:  [this-RFC, Section 7.4]

   Applications that use this media type:  ACME clients and servers,
      HTTP servers, other applications that need to be configured with a
      certificate chain

   Additional information:  Deprecated alias names for this type:  n/a
                            Magic number(s):  n/a
                            File extension(s):  .pem
                            Macintosh file type code(s):  n/a

   Person & email address to contact for further information:  See
      Authors' Addresses section.

   Intended usage:  COMMON

   Restrictions on usage:  n/a

   Author:  See Authors' Addresses section.

   Change controller:  IETF

11.3.  CertificatePropertyType Registry

   IANA is requested to create the "CertificatePropertyType" registry
   within the "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Extensions" group.  The
   initial entries in the registry are as follows:

         +=========+===============================+============+
         | Decimal | Description                   | References |
         +=========+===============================+============+
         | 0       | trust_anchor_id               | [this-RFC] |
         +---------+-------------------------------+------------+
         | 1       | trust_anchor_group_inclusions | [this-RFC] |
         +---------+-------------------------------+------------+
         | 2       | trust_anchor_negotiation      | [this-RFC] |
         +---------+-------------------------------+------------+

                                 Table 2

   New values are allocated according to the following process:

   *  Values in the range 0-65279 are assigned via Specification
      Required [RFC8126].

   *  Values in the range 65280-65535 are reserved for Private Use
      [RFC8126].

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC4158]  Cooper, M., Dzambasow, Y., Hesse, P., Joseph, S., and R.
              Nicholas, "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure:
              Certification Path Building", RFC 4158,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4158, September 2005,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4158>.

   [RFC5234]  Crocker, D., Ed. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
              Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5234, January 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5234>.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, DOI 10.17487/RFC5280, May 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5280>.

   [RFC6838]  Freed, N., Klensin, J., and T. Hansen, "Media Type
              Specifications and Registration Procedures", BCP 13,
              RFC 6838, DOI 10.17487/RFC6838, January 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6838>.

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6973, July 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6973>.

   [RFC7468]  Josefsson, S. and S. Leonard, "Textual Encodings of PKIX,
              PKCS, and CMS Structures", RFC 7468, DOI 10.17487/RFC7468,
              April 2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7468>.

   [RFC8126]  Cotton, M., Leiba, B., and T. Narten, "Guidelines for
              Writing an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26,
              RFC 8126, DOI 10.17487/RFC8126, June 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8126>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC8555]  Barnes, R., Hoffman-Andrews, J., McCarney, D., and J.
              Kasten, "Automatic Certificate Management Environment
              (ACME)", RFC 8555, DOI 10.17487/RFC8555, March 2019,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8555>.

   [RFC9110]  Fielding, R., Ed., Nottingham, M., Ed., and J. Reschke,
              Ed., "HTTP Semantics", STD 97, RFC 9110,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9110, June 2022,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110>.

   [RFC9371]  Baber, A. and P. Hoffman, "Registration Procedures for
              Private Enterprise Numbers (PENs)", RFC 9371,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9371, March 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9371>.

   [RFC9846]  Rescorla, E., "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol
              Version 1.3", RFC 9846, DOI 10.17487/RFC9846, July 2026,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9846>.

   [X680]     ITU-T, "Information technology - Abstract Syntax Notation
              One (ASN.1): Specification of basic notation", ISO/
              IEC 8824-1:2021, 2021,
              <https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.680>.

   [X690]     ITU-T, "Information technology - ASN.1 encoding rules:
              Specification of Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical
              Encoding Rules (CER) and Distinguished Encoding Rules
              (DER)", ISO/IEC 8825-1:2021, 2021,
              <https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.690>.

12.2.  Informative References

   [CHROME-ROOTS]
              Chromium, "Chrome Root Store", 30 August 2023,
              <https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/main/net/
              data/ssl/chrome_root_store>.

   [FIPS204]  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
              "Module-Lattice-based Digital Signature Standard", FIPS
              PUB 204, August 2023, <https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/
              post-quantum-cryptography>.

   [I-D.ietf-plants-merkle-tree-certs]
              Benjamin, D., O'Brien, D., Westerbaan, B., Valenta, L.,
              and F. Valsorda, "Merkle Tree Certificates", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-plants-merkle-tree-
              certs-05, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-plants-
              merkle-tree-certs-05>.

   [MOZILLA-ROOTS]
              Mozilla, "Mozilla Included CA Certificate List", 30 August
              2023, <https://wiki.mozilla.org/CA/Included_Certificates>.

   [RFC4366]  Blake-Wilson, S., Nystrom, M., Hopwood, D., Mikkelsen, J.,
              and T. Wright, "Transport Layer Security (TLS)
              Extensions", RFC 4366, DOI 10.17487/RFC4366, April 2006,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4366>.

   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6962>.

   [RFC7469]  Evans, C., Palmer, C., and R. Sleevi, "Public Key Pinning
              Extension for HTTP", RFC 7469, DOI 10.17487/RFC7469, April
              2015, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7469>.

   [SCTNotAfter]
              Adrian, D., "How to distrust a CA without any certificate
              errors", March 2025,
              <https://dadrian.io/blog/posts/sct-not-after/>.

Acknowledgements

   The authors thank Nick Harper, and Emily Stark for many valuable
   discussions and insights which led to this document.  Thanks also to
   Aaron Gable for providing feedback on ACME extensions.

Authors' Addresses

   Bob Beck
   OpenSSL
   Email: beck@openssl.org


   David Benjamin
   Google LLC
   Email: davidben@google.com


   Devon O'Brien
   Email: devon.obrien@gmail.com


   Kyle Nekritz
   Meta
   Email: knekritz@meta.com
